AI #1793: Create Commitment Program Eligibility Details column (#1882)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/cost_and_usage/columns/commitmenteligibilitydetails.md

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details identifies the types of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs for which a usage line item is eligible. This column enables practitioners to understand which commitment programs are available for a given usage line item, supporting the calculation of true coverage and uncovered spend.

Reviewer: It may make sense to include a prior requirement into the description: pasted for ease of incorporation, though we didn't land on a precise suggestion (up to you @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware to incorporate or not):

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD reflect inherent eligibility, but MAY include provider-specific constraints that affect purchase ability.

Author: Addressed

## Requirements

The CommitmentEligibilityDetails column adheres to the following requirements:

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be present in a Cost and Usage [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports at least one type of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) program.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails nullability is defined as follows:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be null when the usage is not eligible for any commitment program.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null when the usage is eligible for at least one publicly available commitment program.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be populated for all eligible usage, regardless of whether a commitment was actually applied to the line item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is logically redundant with the MUST NOT be null requirement on line 15. If it's not null, it's populated. Keeping both risks implying "populated" means something different from "not null."

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD reflect inherent eligibility, but MAY include provider-specific constraints that affect purchase ability.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST include all publicly available commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD include negotiated or private commitment programs for which the usage is eligible, but MAY omit them at the provider's discretion.

Reviewer: Based on TF-3 discussion, here's our recommendation:

```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD include negotiated commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.
```

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to [term](#glossary:term) lengths or payment options.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails.commitmenteligibilitydetailsobject) requirements when CommitmentEligibilityDetails is not null.

## Commitment Eligibility Details Object

Commitment Eligibility Details consists of a valid JSON object with top-level property keys representing categories of commitment programs. Each key contains an array of objects describing the specific commitment types available for the line item's usage.

### Object Requirements

The CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject adheres to the following requirements:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject adheres to the following requirements when CommitmentEligibilityDetails is not null:
```

Without this guard, the requirements technically apply even when the column is null. AllocatedMethodDetails explicitly scopes its object requirements the same way: "When AllocatedMethodDetails is not null, the JsonObjectFormat for AllocatedMethodDetails adheres to the following requirements."

* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have at least one top-level property key when not null.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CommitmentDiscountTypes".
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys for future or provider-specific commitment categories.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes adheres to the following requirements:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type Array.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST contain one or more objects.

>   * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
```

As written, this says the array itself MUST be of type JSON Object, which contradicts the Array type defined in the Top-Level Properties table (line 53) and all examples. This clarifies that each entry in the array must be an object.

    { "Type": "ReservedInstance" }
  ]
}
```

### JSON Type Definition

``` json
{
  "definitions": {
    "commitmentDiscountTypeEntry": {
      "properties": {
        "Type": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }
  },
  "optionalProperties": {
    "CommitmentDiscountTypes": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentDiscountTypeEntry" }
    }
  }
}
```

NOTE: The above JSON Type Definition (JTD) is an approximation of the expected contents of this column, but it should not be considered normative because it cannot accurately describe the normative requirements (above) for CommitmentEligibilityDetails. Where there are discrepancies, deference will be given to the normative requirements.

### Object ID

CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject

### Object Display Name

Commitment Eligibility Details Object

## Column ID

CommitmentEligibilityDetails

## Display Name

Commitment Eligibility Details

## Description

The types of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs available for a specific usage line item.

## Content constraints

| Constraint    | Value                                                                                                                        |

> |:-------------------------------------|:---------------------------------|

Reviewer: The Content Constraints table is missing the Dataset row. All other columns (AllocatedMethodDetails, CommitmentDiscountType, SkuPriceDetails) include it:

```suggestion
| Constraint    | Value                                                                                                                        |
|:-------------------------------------|:---------------------------------|
| Dataset       | [Cost and Usage](#datasets.costandusage)                                                                                     |
| Column type   | Dimension                                                                                                                    |
```

|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| `CommitmentDiscountTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) programs for which the usage is eligible. |

### CommitmentDiscountTypes Entry

| Key  | ValueType                            | Required | Description                                                                |
|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| Type | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True     | The specific type of commitment discount program available for this usage. |

### Object Example

``` json
{
  "CommitmentDiscountTypes": [
    { "Type": "SavingsPlan" },
    { "Type": "ReservedInstance" }
  ]
}
```

### JSON Type Definition

``` json
{
  "definitions": {
    "commitmentDiscountTypeEntry": {
      "properties": {
        "Type": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }
  },
  "optionalProperties": {
    "CommitmentDiscountTypes": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentDiscountTypeEntry" }
    }
  }
}
```

> NOTE: The above JSON Type Definition (JTD) is an approximation of the expected contents of this column, but it should not be considered normative because it cannot accurately describe the normative requirements (above) for CommitmentEligibilityDetails. Where there are discrepancies, deference will be given to the normative requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: The above JSON Type Definition (JTD) is an approximation of the expected contents of this column, but it should not be considered normative because it cannot accurately describe the normative requirements (above) for CommitmentEligibilityDetails. Where there are discrepancies, preference will be given to the normative requirements.
```

Reviewer 2: In addition, since this is a new column, would it be beneficial to readers if possible discrepancies were mentioned? Are there any that were experience during some level of testing/validation of this new column?

## Requirements

The CommitmentEligibilityDetails column adheres to the following requirements:

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be present in a Cost and Usage [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports at least one type of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) program.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails nullability is defined as follows:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be null when the charge is not eligible for any commitment program.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null when the charge is eligible for at least one publicly available commitment program.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT consider transient account configurations or quotas that might temporarily prevent purchase or participation in a commitment program.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be null when a charge is not eligible for any commitment program.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be populated when a charge is eligible for a commitment program, regardless of whether a commitment was actually applied to the line item.
```

Author: I've incorporated this into the commit I just made. I would like to keep this requirement though, unless we feel strongly about it not being there? It is common for commitment purchasing to be turned off on many linked accounts, so I'd like to call this out excplicitly that we do not preclude this
"CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT consider transient account configurations or quotas that might temporarily prevent purchase or participation in a commitment program."

# Commitment Eligibility Details

Commitment Eligibility Details identifies the types of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs for which a usage line item is eligible. This column enables practitioners to understand which commitment programs are available for a given usage line item, supporting the calculation of true coverage and uncovered spend.

## Requirements

The CommitmentEligibilityDetails column adheres to the following requirements:

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be present in a Cost and Usage [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports at least one type of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) program.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails nullability is defined as follows:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be null when the usage is not eligible for any commitment program.

>   * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null when the usage is eligible for at least one publicly available commitment program.

Reviewer: ## TF3 Action Item – 2026-02-20

Udam flagged that the current nullability language ("when the usage is not eligible") sounds like a general category statement rather than a row-level predicate. He committed to posting a suggestion that aligns with the established Commitment Discount ID pattern: "must be null when a charge is not related to..." / "must not be null when a charge is related to..."

**Scope:**
- [ ] Post suggestion aligning nullability requirements with the Commitment Discount ID pattern (charge-level, not usage-level language)

**Assignee:** @udam-stitcher

Author: Addressed.

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the provider as commitments.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a service provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any service provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the service provider as commitments.
```

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST include all publicly available commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD include negotiated commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to commitment [*periods*](#glossary:periods) or payment options.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails.commitmenteligibilitydetailsobject) requirements when CommitmentEligibilityDetails is not null.

## Commitment Eligibility Details Object

Commitment Eligibility Details consists of a valid JSON object with top-level property keys representing categories of commitment programs. Each key contains an array of objects describing the specific commitment types available for the usage charge.

### Object Requirements

CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST adhere to the following requirements:
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have at least one top-level property key when not null.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CommitmentDiscountTypes".

Reviewer 4: I suggest we rename this property

#### Reasoning:

- `CommitmentDiscountType` is the name of a column used specifically for **commitment discounts** (non-negotiated commitments with no carry-over, such as RIs and Savings Plans), which aligned with the original scope of the CommitmentEligibilityDetails column. When we expanded the scope to include other commitment programs, we revisited the column name but not the property itself.

Reviewer: @ijurica @shawnalpay @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware — Revisiting the internal object structure based on Irena's point about `CommitmentDiscountTypes` and Shawn's earlier question about collapsing.

**Proposal: Collapse to a single `CommitmentPrograms` array with `ProgramType` entries.**

Before (current PR):
```json
{
  "CommitmentDiscountTypes": [
    {"Type": "SavingsPlan"},
    {"Type": "ReservedInstance"}
  ],
  "CapacityReservationTypes": [
    {"Type": "CapacityReservation"}
  ]
}
```

After (proposed):
```json
{
  "CommitmentPrograms": [
    {"ProgramType": "SavingsPlan"},
    {"ProgramType": "ReservedInstance"},
    {"ProgramType": "CapacityReservation"}
  ]
}
```

**Why:**

1. Irena is right that `CommitmentDiscountTypes` collides with the `CommitmentDiscountType` column name and is too narrow for the expanded scope of this column. Renaming the property is overdue.

2. Shawn flagged on 3/11 that the two arrays are structurally identical. They are: same shape, same child keys, same constraints. The only difference is the column-consistency requirement for discount types, which works just as well targeting specific `ProgramType` values.

3. A single `CommitmentPrograms` key aligns with the glossary term "Commitment Program" and eliminates the need for spec amendments when new program categories emerge. New categories = new `ProgramType` values, not new top-level keys.

4. This simplifies the normative requirements from two near-duplicate blocks to one, and the JTD from two identical definitions to one. It will also make the follow-on work to align this column with the JSON Schema structure from #2007 simpler.

**Column-consistency requirement adapts as:**

> CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST be consistent with strings used in CommitmentDiscountType when CommitmentDiscountType is populated by the provider for the corresponding commitment discount.

**Extensibility:** Providers can still use `x_`-prefixed keys on individual entries or add `x_`-prefixed top-level siblings to `CommitmentPrograms`.

TF3 aligned on "JSON object" as the data type. The internal structure is implementation detail we should get right before v1.4 ships. Post-release this becomes a breaking change.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 5: Looks like @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware implemented this, but will leave to you to resolve, @Matt-Cowsert and/or @ijurica.

Reviewer 4: LGTM

Author: Thank you!

* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CapacityReservationTypes" for commitment programs whose primary purpose is to reserve capacity rather than to provide a unit discount.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys for future or provider-specific commitment categories.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys for future or service provider-specific commitment categories.
```

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the provider as commitments.

Reviewer 5: Reissuing [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1882/files/d2471dd7a55a149994be7c101bb40ea68efa6721#r2919951274) (and closing it) so that the still-outstanding concern is no longer flagged as outdated:

The term "commitment program" is used enough times in this PR (especially in the normative requirements) that it feels like it deserves its own dedicated section/explanation. Either as a glossary entry, or (perhaps better) a dedicated subsection here in the overview, which you could anchor link in each of the normative requirements that uses the phrase.

Also, can we avoid use of "line item" in favor of "row" or "charge"?  Whatever the decision there would need to be reflected in the Description at the end of the column definition as well.

Reviewer 5: Looks good now.

  
### Top-Level Properties

| Property                  | Type  | Required    | Description                                                                                                                   |
|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| `CommitmentDiscountTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) programs for which the usage is eligible. |
| `CapacityReservationTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying capacity-reservation commitment programs (e.g., capacity reservations, zonal reservations) for which the usage is eligible. |

### Example Entries

| Key  | ValueType                            | Required | Description                                                                |
|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| Type | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True     | The specific type of commitment discount program available for this usage. |

> | Type | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True     | The specific type of capacity-reservation commitment program available for this usage. |

Reviewer 5: We need to de-duplicate this down to a single entry.  And I think `Type` is an overloaded semantic term and not specific enough; recommend moving to `ProgramType`.

If you accept this suggestion, the switch from `Type` to `ProgramType` needs implementation throughout the examples/verbiage in this PR.

```suggestion
| Key         | ValueType                            | Required | Description                                                                                                |
|:------------|:-------------------------------------|:---------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ProgramType | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True     | The specific type of commitment program (e.g., discount or capacity reservation) available for this usage. |
```

### Object ID

CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject

### Object Display Name

Commitment Eligibility Details Object

## Column ID

CommitmentEligibilityDetails

## Display Name

Commitment Eligibility Details

## Description

The types of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs available for a specific usage row.

## Content constraints

| Constraint    | Value                                                                                                                        |
|:-------------------------------------|:---------------------------------|
| Dataset       | [Cost and Usage](#datasets.costandusage)                                                                                     |
| Column type   | Dimension                                                                                                                    |
| Feature level | Conditional                                                                                                                  |
| Allows nulls  | True                                                                                                                         |

> | Data type     | String                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer 5: This needs to be JSON to be consistent with our other JSON columns (e.g. `AllocatedMethodDetails`).

```suggestion
| Data type     | JSON                                                                                                                       |
```

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a provider designates as applicable to a usage line item. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the provider as commitments.

Reviewer 5: Spec convention is to use `e.g.,` instead of `for example,`.

## Requirements

> CommitmentEligibilityDetails column MUST adhere to the following requirements:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST adhere to the following requirements:
```

* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST adhere to the following requirements:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type Array.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST contain one or more objects.
  * Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST have a property key "Type".
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST be of type String.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST NOT be null.

>   * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST correspond to a commitment program type supported by the provider (for example, "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CommittedUseDiscount").

Reviewer 5: Spec convention is to use `.e.g,` instead of `for example,`.

```suggestion
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST correspond to a commitment program type supported by the provider (e.g., "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CommittedUseDiscount").
```

Author: done

  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the provider in public documentation when CommitmentDiscountType is not populated by the provider.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST adhere to the following requirements:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type Array.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST contain one or more objects.
  * Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have a property key "Type".
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST be of type String.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST NOT be null.

>   * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST correspond to a capacity-reservation-style commitment program supported by the provider (for example, "CapacityReservation", "ZonalReservation").

Reviewer 5: Spec convention is to use `e.g.,` instead of `for example,`.

```suggestion
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST correspond to a capacity-reservation-style commitment program supported by the provider (e.g., "CapacityReservation", "ZonalReservation").
```

  
### Top-Level Properties

| Property                  | Type  | Required    | Description                                                                                                                   |
|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| `CommitmentDiscountTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) programs for which the usage is eligible. |

> | `CapacityReservationTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying capacity-reservation commitment programs (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations) for which the usage is eligible. |

Reviewer 5: Spec convention is to use `e.g.,`.

```suggestion
| `CapacityReservationTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying capacity-reservation commitment programs (e.g., capacity reservations, zonal reservations) for which the usage is eligible. |
```

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a provider designates as applicable to a usage line item. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the provider as commitments.

Reviewer 5: The term "commitment program" is used enough times in this PR (especially in the normative requirements) that it feels like it deserves its own dedicated section/explanation.  Either as a glossary entry, or (perhaps better) a dedicated subsection here in the overview, which you could anchor link in each of the normative requirements that uses the phrase.

Reviewer 5: Also, can we avoid use of "line item" in favor of "row" or "charge"?

Whatever the decision there would need to be reflected in the Description at the end of the column definition as well.

Reviewer 5: Closing this in favor of a newly-issued thread so that it is no longer flagged as outdated.

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a provider designates as applicable to a usage line item. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible.For the purposes of this column, [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the provider as commitments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a provider designates as applicable to a usage line item. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the provider as commitments.
```

Two fixes: missing space after "ineligible." and second glossary link to commitment changed to italic-only per link-once rule.

Author: addressed

## Requirements

> CommitmentEligibilityDetails column adheres to the following requirements:

Reviewer 5: Per tweak to format as recently agreed and merged via PR #2015:

```suggestion
CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST adhere to the following requirements:
```

Author: addressed

> The CommitmentEligibilityDetails column adheres to the following requirements:

Reviewer 6: Did we agree to remove "The" and "Column" words in previous discussions @jpradocueva

Author: addressed

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be present in a Cost and Usage [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports at least one type of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) program.

Reviewer 5: Presence conditions now live at the dataset level.  Please move this to the Cost and Usage `dataset.md`.

Reviewer 5: Also... do we need the word "type" in here?  Seems like "commitment program" is sufficient.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be present in a Cost and Usage [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the provider supports at least one [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) program.

Author: Just commitment program. This is by design.

Reviewer 5: I'm sorry, I'm not following -- do you mean you agree or disagree with my feedback that we should strike "type of"?

Author: I agree with your feedback. Just commitment program is good. Change made

Reviewer 5: I directly committed the move of the presence condition to the dataset level.  And you incorporated my "type of" feedback.  Resolving!

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be null when a charge is not eligible for any commitment program.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be populated when a charge is eligible for a commitment program, regardless of whether a commitment was actually applied to the line item.

Reviewer 5: Do we truly need both of these lines?  Feels like line 14 alone would be sufficient.  Also, the normative requirement for null needs finesse.

```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null when a charge is eligible for a commitment program, regardless of whether a commitment was actually applied to the line item.
```

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT consider transient account configurations or quotas that might temporarily prevent purchase or participation in a commitment program.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST include all publicly available commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD include negotiated commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to [term](#glossary:term) lengths or payment options.

Reviewer 5: "Term" no longer refers to a length of time in the glossary -- it now means any agreement on a contract, and the previous definition was replaced by "period".  

With that in mind: is the way it's written correct?  If so, please resolve.  Or should it be:

```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to commitment [*periods*](#glossary:periods) or payment options.
```

* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes adheres to the following requirements:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type Array.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST contain one or more objects.
  * Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST have a property key "Type".
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST be of type String.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST NOT be null.

>   * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST correspond to a commitment program type supported by the provider (e.g., "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CommittedUseDiscount").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST correspond to a commitment program type supported by the provider (for example, "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CommittedUseDiscount").
```

"e.g." changed to "for example" to match the parallel requirement on line 54.

Reviewer 5: Disagree with this change.  `e.g.,` is our accepted shorthand for examples.  Propose leaving as-is.

Author: I changed it to "for example" - are we proposing a revert?

Reviewer 5: @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware Yes. (This is why it's important to resolve outdated comments once addressed -- otherwise it's not clear whether it's been addressed.)

I will leave a fresh comment; you can resolve this one.

  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST be consistent with strings used in [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) when CommitmentDiscountType is populated by the provider.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the provider in public documentation when CommitmentDiscountType is not populated by the provider.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes adheres to the following requirements:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type Array.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST contain one or more objects.
  * Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have a property key "Type".
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.

>   * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
```

Missing backslash escape on `x_`. Lines 32 and 39 use `x\_`.

Author: addressed

|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| `CommitmentDiscountTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) programs for which the usage is eligible. |
| `CapacityReservationTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying capacity-reservation commitment programs (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations) for which the usage is eligible. |

### CommitmentDiscountTypes Entry

| Key  | ValueType                            | Required | Description                                                                |
|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| Type | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True     | The specific type of commitment discount program available for this usage. |

### CapacityReservationTypes Entry

| Key  | ValueType                            | Required | Description                                                                |
|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|

> | Type | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True     | The specific type of capacity-reservation commitment program available for this usage. |

Reviewer 5: These are the same, structurally... are you open to collapsing them down to a single, more generic `commitmentPrograms` (or similar)?  See the below JTD suggestion I'm making...

Author: Done!

### Object Example

``` json
{
  "CommitmentDiscountTypes": [
    { "Type": "SavingsPlan" },
    { "Type": "ReservedInstance" }
  ],
  "CapacityReservationTypes": [
    { "Type": "CapacityReservation" },
    { "Type": "ZonalReservation" }
  ]
}
```

### JSON Type Definition

``` json
{
  "definitions": {
    "commitmentDiscountTypeEntry": {
      "properties": {
        "Type": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }
  },
  "optionalProperties": {
    "CommitmentDiscountTypes": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentDiscountTypeEntry" }
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
{
  "definitions": {
    "commitmentProgramEntry": {
      "properties": {
        "Type": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }
  },
  "optionalProperties": {
    "CommitmentDiscountTypes": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentProgramEntry" }
    },
    "CapacityReservationTypes": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentProgramEntry" }
    }
  }
}
```

### Object Example

``` json
{
  "CommitmentPrograms": [
    { "ProgramType": "SavingsPlan" },
    { "ProgramType": "ReservedInstance" },
    { "ProgramType": "CapacityReservation" },
    { "ProgramType": "ZonalReservation" }
  ]
}
```

### JSON Type Definition

``` json
{
  "definitions": {
    "commitmentProgramEntry": {
      "properties": {
        "ProgramType": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }
  },
  "properties": {
    "CommitmentPrograms": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentProgramEntry" }
    }
  }
}
```

NOTE: The above JSON Type Definition (JTD) is an approximation of the expected contents of this column, but it should not be considered normative because it cannot accurately describe the normative requirements (above) for CommitmentEligibilityDetails. Where there are discrepancies, preference will be given to the normative requirements.

## Example Scenarios

The examples below are not exhaustive and may change over time. Service providers are the authoritative source for their [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program).

> **Provider A (Partially covered Virtual Machine Usage)**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Provider A (Partially covered Virtual Machine Usage)
```

Author: Made this change to all the examples in my latest commit

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) a service provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any service provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment programs* include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the service provider as [*commitments*](#glossary:commitment).

Reviewer 5: Looking to wordsmith this section.  Amongst other things, I would like to link to the glossary entry for "covered charge" currently proposed by PR #1966.

```suggestion
Commitment Eligibility Details identifies the [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) that could potentially [*cover charges*](#glossary:covered-charge), subject to [*service provider*](#glossary:service-provider) constraints. By distinguishing the pool of spend that was eligible to be covered, Commitment Eligibility Details provides the fundamental denominator for calculating precise commitment coverage metrics. This allows FinOps practitioners to accurately size the pool of uncovered spend that could realistically be covered by a future commitment. In this context, *commitment programs* include both discount-bearing constructs (e.g., Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and advance capacity reservations (e.g., zonal reservations), provided the service provider treats them as [*commitments*](#glossary:commitment).
```

|-----------|-----------|----------------------------------------|
| Provider B          | Infrastructure | {"CommitmentPrograms": [{"ProgramType": "MonthlyCommitment"}, {"ProgramType": "AnnualCommitment"}]} |

### Provider C (Ineligible Object Storage Usage)

Scenario: Standard object storage usage or a support fee, which is not eligible for any commitment program.

| ServiceProviderName | ServiceName   | CommitmentEligibilityDetails |
|---------------------|---------------|------------------------------|
| Provider C          | ObjectStorage | null                         |

### Provider D (Capacity Reservation-eligible EC2 Usage)

A compute instance type and tenancy that are eligible for both Savings Plans/Reserved Instances and for capacity reservations (e.g., regional reservations, zonal reservations). The eligibility column reflects all commitment constructs the usage qualifies for.

| ServiceProviderName | ServiceName    | CommitmentEligibilityDetails                                                                                                                                               |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|

> | Provider D          | Compute Engine | {"CommitmentPrograms": [{"ProgramType": "SavingsPlan"}, {"ProgramType": "ReservedInstance"}, {"ProgramType": "CapacityReservation"}, {"ProgramType": "ZonalReservation"}]} |

Reviewer 5: Need to harmonize the language here.  The header says `EC2 Usage` (AWS construct) but the ServiceName in the example is `Compute Engine` (GCP construct).

Ideally, we avoid using either of the proprietary terms.  How about:

```suggestion
### Provider D (Capacity Reservation-eligible Compute Usage)

A compute instance type and tenancy that are eligible for both Savings Plans/Reserved Instances and for capacity reservations (e.g., regional reservations, zonal reservations). The eligibility column reflects all commitment constructs the usage qualifies for.

| ServiceProviderName | ServiceName    | CommitmentEligibilityDetails                                                                                                                                               |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Provider D          | Compute | {"CommitmentPrograms": [{"ProgramType": "SavingsPlan"}, {"ProgramType": "ReservedInstance"}, {"ProgramType": "CapacityReservation"}, {"ProgramType": "ZonalReservation"}]} |
```

# Commitment Eligibility Details

Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a service provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any service provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the service provider as commitments.

## Requirements

CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST adhere to the following requirements:

-   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.
-   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.
```

Dash to asterisk for consistency with lines 12-16.

*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null when a charge is eligible for a [*commitment program*](#glossary:commitment-program), regardless of whether a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) was actually applied to the charge.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT consider transient account configurations or quotas that might temporarily prevent purchase or participation in a *commitment program*.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST include all publicly available *commitment programs* for which the usage is eligible.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD include negotiated *commitment programs* for which the usage is eligible.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to *commitment* [*periods*](#glossary:period) or payment options.

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails.commitmenteligibilitydetailsobject) requirements when CommitmentEligibilityDetails is not null.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails.commitmenteligibilitydetailsobject) requirements when CommitmentEligibilityDetails is not null.
```

Dash to asterisk for consistency with lines 12-16.

## Commitment Eligibility Details Object

Commitment Eligibility Details consists of a valid JSON object with a top-level property key `CommitmentPrograms` containing an array of objects describing the specific [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) available for the usage charge.

### Object Requirements

CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST adhere to the following requirements: 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have at least one top-level property key when not null. 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CommitmentDiscountTypes". 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CapacityReservationTypes" for commitment programs whose primary purpose is to reserve capacity rather than to provide a unit discount. 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys for future or service provider-specific commitment categories.

> 

Reviewer 7: @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware, from the Requirements Model perspective, I suggest removing the empty line on line 30; it breaks the list of requirements unless the intention is to introduce a new composite or parent, in which case it is missing. Also, requirements should be introduced with (*) rather than (-) and are indented to the right only if they are listed under a parent that at the same time is a child. I will reach out to you directly to explain the issues.

Author: Addressed now Jaoquin

Reviewer 5: Confirmed addressed.  Resolving.

    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the service provider in public documentation.
-   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST adhere to the following requirements:
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type Array.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST contain one or more objects.
    -   Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have a property key "Type".
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST be of type String.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST NOT be null.

>     -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST correspond to a capacity-reservation-style commitment program supported by the provider (for example, "CapacityReservation", "ZonalReservation").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST adhere to the following requirements:

*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have a top-level property key "CommitmentPrograms".
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST adhere to the following requirements:
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST be of type Array.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST contain one or more objects.
    *   Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST be of type JSON Object.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST have a property key "ProgramType".
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST be of type String.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST NOT be null.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST correspond to a *commitment program* type supported by the service provider (e.g., "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CommittedUseDiscount", "CapacityReservation", "ZonalReservation").
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST equal [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) for one object in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms when CommitmentDiscountType is not null.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the service provider in public documentation.
```

Completes the collapse to single `CommitmentPrograms` array. Preserves ijurica's accepted wording for the consistency requirement, adapted for `CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType`. Fixes double space from line 42.

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a service provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any service provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the service provider as commitments.

Reviewer: Three glossary linking changes needed on this line:
1. `[*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs` → `[*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program)` (first occurrence, link to the new glossary term)
2. `*commitment* programs` → `*commitment programs*` (second occurrence, italic only per link-once)
3. `commitments` → `[*commitments*](#glossary:commitment)` (first standalone "commitment" in section)

> Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs a service provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any service provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment* programs include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the service provider as commitments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commitment Eligibility Details indicates which [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) a service provider designates as applicable to a usage row. This reflects the inherent eligibility of the service, subject to any service provider-defined constraints. This column enables practitioners to identify uncovered spend that could have been covered, separating it from spend that is strictly ineligible. For the purposes of this column, *commitment programs* include both discount-bearing constructs (for example, Savings Plans, committed-use discounts) and non-discount constructs that reserve capacity in advance (for example, capacity reservations, zonal reservations), when those constructs are treated by the service provider as [*commitments*](#glossary:commitment).
```

Three changes: (1) `[*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs` → `[*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program)`, (2) `*commitment* programs` → `*commitment programs*`, (3) `commitments` → `[*commitments*](#glossary:commitment)`.

## Requirements

CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST adhere to the following requirements:

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.

Reviewer 4: @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware you use  asterisk (`*`) instead of dash (`-`) for bullets. 

*see build errors indicating this: `...Expected: asterisk; Actual: dash`*

Reviewer 5: To be fair to @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware: this is a new error introduced by the approval/merging of #2068 -- but to @ijurica's point, this has always been our convention, and it's just checked by the linter now.

This does need addressing.

Author: I use R studio and this was a side effect of going back and forth between preview mode and markdown. Lesson learnt. This should not be fixed

Reviewer 5: This has been addressed.  Resolving.

-   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
-   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null when a charge is eligible for a commitment program, regardless of whether a commitment was actually applied to the charge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null when a charge is eligible for a [*commitment program*](#glossary:commitment-program), regardless of whether a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) was actually applied to the charge.
```

First occurrence of both glossary terms in this section.

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT consider transient account configurations or quotas that might temporarily prevent purchase or participation in a commitment program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT consider transient account configurations or quotas that might temporarily prevent purchase or participation in a *commitment program*.
```

Subsequent occurrence, italic only.

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST include all publicly available commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST include all publicly available *commitment programs* for which the usage is eligible.
```

Subsequent occurrence, italic only.

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD include negotiated commitment programs for which the usage is eligible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD include negotiated *commitment programs* for which the usage is eligible.
```

Subsequent occurrence, italic only.

> -   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to commitment [*periods*](#glossary:periods) or payment options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to *commitment* [*periods*](#glossary:period) or payment options.
```

Fixes broken anchor (`#glossary:periods` → `#glossary:period`). "commitment" is italic-only (subsequent in section). "periods" links to `glossary:period` (first occurrence in section). Builds on shawnalpay's earlier flag in [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1882#discussion_r2920044070).

-   CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails.commitmenteligibilitydetailsobject) requirements when CommitmentEligibilityDetails is not null.

## Commitment Eligibility Details Object

> Commitment Eligibility Details consists of a valid JSON object with top-level property keys representing categories of commitment programs. Each key contains an array of objects describing the specific commitment types available for the usage charge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commitment Eligibility Details consists of a valid JSON object with a top-level property key `CommitmentPrograms` containing an array of objects describing the specific [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) available for the usage charge.
```

### Object Requirements

> CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST adhere to the following requirements: \* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have at least one top-level property key when not null. \* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CommitmentDiscountTypes". \* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CapacityReservationTypes" for commitment programs whose primary purpose is to reserve capacity rather than to provide a unit discount. \* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys for future or service provider-specific commitment categories.

Reviewer 5: Something got pretty mangled here... I believe this should be:

```suggestion
CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST adhere to the following requirements: 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have at least one top-level property key when not null. 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CommitmentDiscountTypes". 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY have a top-level property key "CapacityReservationTypes" for commitment programs whose primary purpose is to reserve capacity rather than to provide a unit discount. 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys for future or service provider-specific commitment categories.
```

Reviewer 5: I can see this happened via the [latest commit](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/commit/fe7d95234acff79c351673ab2c18ce9ff0ba63d7).

-   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST adhere to the following requirements:
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type Array.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST contain one or more objects.
    -   Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST have a property key "Type".
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST be of type String.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST NOT be null.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST correspond to a commitment program type supported by the provider (e.g., "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CommittedUseDiscount").

>     -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST be consistent with strings used in [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) when CommitmentDiscountType is populated by the provider.

Reviewer 4: Here is a more precise, "static" alternative...

On the other hand, since this requirement will likely be represented in the JSON schema, I’m not sure it’s necessary to rephrase it here.

```suggestion
    -    CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type MUST equal [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) for  one object in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes when CommitmentDiscountType is not null.
```

>     -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the provider in public documentation when CommitmentDiscountType is not populated by the provider.

Reviewer 4: adding a couple of alternatives that you might consider

1/3:

```suggestion
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the service provider in public documentation.
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the service provider in public documentation, if available.
```

Reviewer 4: 3/3:

```suggestion
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentDiscountTypes.Type SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the service provider in public documentation where such terminology is publicly available.
```

Author: Thanks Irena! Chose the first one. Your recommendation makes sense

-   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST adhere to the following requirements:
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type Array.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST contain one or more objects.
    -   Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST be of type JSON Object.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have a property key "Type".
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST be of type String.
    -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST NOT be null.

>     -   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CapacityReservationTypes.Type MUST correspond to a capacity-reservation-style commitment program supported by the provider (for example, "CapacityReservation", "ZonalReservation").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST adhere to the following requirements:

*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have a top-level property key "CommitmentPrograms".
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MAY contain additional data generator-defined top-level property keys.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
*   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST adhere to the following requirements:
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST be of type Array.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST contain one or more objects.
    *   Each entry in CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST be of type JSON Object.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST have a property key "ProgramType".
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MAY contain additional data generator-defined property keys.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms MUST have property keys that begin with the string "x\_" unless it is a FOCUS-defined property key.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST be of type String.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST NOT be null.
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST correspond to a *commitment program* type supported by the service provider (e.g., "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CommittedUseDiscount", "CapacityReservation", "ZonalReservation").
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType MUST be consistent with strings used in [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) when CommitmentDiscountType is populated by the service provider for the corresponding [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount).
    *   CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject.CommitmentPrograms.ProgramType SHOULD correspond to terminology disclosed by the service provider in public documentation when CommitmentDiscountType is not populated by the service provider.
```

Collapses two near-duplicate requirement blocks into one. Fixes mangled line 25 formatting. Switches dashes to asterisks. Applies glossary linking for *commitment program*, [CommitmentDiscountType], and [*commitment discount*].

Author: These have been an unfortunate side effect of switching between preview mode and markdown in R Studio. This was reintroduced but I quickly caught it and fixed it.

Reviewer 5: Confirmed this has been addressed.  Resolving.

### Top-Level Properties

| Property                   | Type  | Required    | Description                                                                                                                                              |
|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|
| `CommitmentDiscountTypes`  | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) programs for which the usage is eligible.                            |

> | `CapacityReservationTypes` | Array | Conditional | Array of objects identifying capacity-reservation commitment programs (e.g., capacity reservations, zonal reservations) for which the usage is eligible. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Property             | Type  | Required | Description                                                                        |
|:---------------------|:------|:---------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `CommitmentPrograms` | Array | True     | Array of objects identifying *commitment programs* for which the usage is eligible. |
```

Single required property replaces two conditional ones. Italic-only glossary (linked on line 21).

### Example Entries

| Key         | ValueType                            | Required | Description                                                                                                |
|:-----------|:-----------|:-----------|:-------------------------------------|
| ProgramType | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True     | The specific type of commitment program (e.g., discount or capacity reservation) available for this usage. |

### Object Example

``` json
{
  "CommitmentDiscountTypes": [
    { "Type": "SavingsPlan" },
    { "Type": "ReservedInstance" }
  ],
  "CapacityReservationTypes": [
    { "Type": "CapacityReservation" },
    { "Type": "ZonalReservation" }
  ]

> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "CommitmentPrograms": [
    { "ProgramType": "SavingsPlan" },
    { "ProgramType": "ReservedInstance" },
    { "ProgramType": "CapacityReservation" },
    { "ProgramType": "ZonalReservation" }
  ]
}
```

```

### JSON Type Definition

``` json
{
  "definitions": {
    "commitmentProgramEntry": {
      "properties": {
        "Type": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }
  },
  "optionalProperties": {
    "CommitmentDiscountTypes": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentProgramEntry" }
    },
    "CapacityReservationTypes": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentProgramEntry" }
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "definitions": {
    "commitmentProgramEntry": {
      "properties": {
        "ProgramType": { "type": "string" }
      }
    }
  },
  "properties": {
    "CommitmentPrograms": {
      "elements": { "ref": "commitmentProgramEntry" }
    }
  }
}
```

`optionalProperties` → `properties` since CommitmentPrograms is required. Single array definition.

```

NOTE: The above JSON Type Definition (JTD) is an approximation of the expected contents of this column, but it should not be considered normative because it cannot accurately describe the normative requirements (above) for CommitmentEligibilityDetails. Where there are discrepancies, preference will be given to the normative requirements.

## Example Scenarios

> The examples below are not exhaustive and may change over time. Service providers are the authoritative source for their commitment programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The examples below are not exhaustive and may change over time. Service providers are the authoritative source for their [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program).
```

First occurrence in this section.

**Azure (Partially covered Virtual Machine Usage)**

A Virtual Machine usage row that is partially covered by Savings Plan. The eligibility column still reflects all programs this usage qualifies for, regardless of current coverage.

| ServiceProviderName | ServiceName      | ChargeClass | CommitmentEligibilityDetails                                                         |
|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|

> | Azure               | Virtual Machines | Usage       | {"CommitmentDiscountTypes": [{"Type": "SavingsPlan"}, {"Type": "ReservedInstance"}]} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Azure               | Virtual Machines | Usage       | {"CommitmentPrograms": [{"ProgramType": "SavingsPlan"}, {"ProgramType": "ReservedInstance"}]} |
```

**Datadog (Monthly and Annual Commitment)**

> An On-Demand infrastructure host usage row (potentially billed as overage). This usage is eligible for coverage under commitment plans that offer lower rates than On-Demand. Since Datadog does not populate CommitmentDiscountType, the Type values correspond to publicly available program names from Datadog documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An On-Demand infrastructure host usage row (potentially billed as overage). This usage is eligible for coverage under commitment plans that offer lower rates than On-Demand. Since Datadog does not populate CommitmentDiscountType, the ProgramType values correspond to publicly available program names from Datadog documentation.
```

"Type values" → "ProgramType values".

| ServiceProviderName | ServiceName    | ChargeClass | CommitmentEligibilityDetails                                                               |
|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|

> | Datadog             | Infrastructure | Usage       | {"CommitmentDiscountTypes": [{"Type": "MonthlyCommitment"}, {"Type": "AnnualCommitment"}]} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Datadog             | Infrastructure | Usage       | {"CommitmentPrograms": [{"ProgramType": "MonthlyCommitment"}, {"ProgramType": "AnnualCommitment"}]} |
```

**AWS (Capacity Reservation-eligible EC2 Usage)**

An EC2 instance type and tenancy that are eligible for both Savings Plans/Reserved Instances and for capacity reservations (e.g., regional reservations, zonal reservations). The eligibility column reflects all commitment constructs the usage qualifies for.

| ServiceProviderName | ServiceName | ChargeClass | CommitmentEligibilityDetails                                                                                                                                                      |
|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|

> | AWS                 | AmazonEC2   | Usage       | {"CommitmentDiscountTypes": [{"Type": "SavingsPlan"}, {"Type": "ReservedInstance"}], "CapacityReservationTypes": [{"Type": "CapacityReservation"}, {"Type": "ZonalReservation"}]} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| AWS                 | AmazonEC2   | Usage       | {"CommitmentPrograms": [{"ProgramType": "SavingsPlan"}, {"ProgramType": "ReservedInstance"}, {"ProgramType": "CapacityReservation"}, {"ProgramType": "ZonalReservation"}]} |
```

### Object ID

CommitmentEligibilityDetailsObject

### Object Display Name

Commitment Eligibility Details Object

## Column ID

CommitmentEligibilityDetails

## Display Name

Commitment Eligibility Details

## Description

> The types of [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs available for a specific usage row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The types of [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) available for a specific usage row.
```

Standalone section, links to the more precise glossary term.

# Commitment Eligibility Details

> Commitment Eligibility Details presents all types of usage based [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs available for a specific usage line item. This column allows practitioners to distinguish between usage that is or in the past has been eligible for a [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) and usage that lacks such an option, enabling the calculation of true coverage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commitment Eligibility Details presents all types of usage based [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) programs available for a specific usage line item. This column allows practitioners to which [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) program are available for a usage line item, enabling the calculation of true coverage and uncovered spend.
```

## Requirements

CommitmentEligibilityDetails adheres to the following requirements:

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetailsDetails MUST be present in Cost and Usage [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the service provider supports at least one type of [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be present in Cost and Usage [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) when the service provider supports at least one type of [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) program.
```

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be of type String.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails nullability is defined as follows:
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be null if the usage is not eligible for any non-negotiated commitment.
  * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT be null if the usage is eligible for any non-negotiated commitment.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST correspond to defined [commitment](#glossary:commitment) program types (e.g., "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "CUD") or vendor-specific pricing tiers (e.g., "MonthlyCommitment").
* The values in CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be consistent with strings used in [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) for the provider.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST NOT include data related to [term](#glossary:term) lengths or payment options.

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be populated for all eligible usage, regardless of whether a commitment discount was actually applied to the line item (i.e., even if CommitmentDiscountType is present, this column must still list the eligible programs).

Reviewer: I'd be careful with using lowercase must unless it's absolutely necessary. I recommend slightly rewording the example part to reduce ambiguity, here's my recommendation:
```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST be populated for all eligible usage, regardless of whether a commitment discount was actually applied to the line item. For example, if CommitmentDiscountType = 'SavingsPlan' and CommitmentEligibilityDetails = '["SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance"]', this indicates the usage was covered by a Savings Plan but could also have been covered by Reserved Instance. 
```

> * CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST reflect eligibility based on the inherent nature of the Service, Category, and SKU (e.g., "Standard" vs "Spot"). It MUST NOT be influenced by transient account configurations or quotas that might temporarily prevent a purchase.

Reviewer: I don't think we should have two normative statements in a single requirement (I need to unwind the example of where I did this for #982 normative requirements as well). 

However, If a practitioner can't actually purchase a RI or SP due to quota limits, showing it as "eligible" creates
a false optimization signal. Suggestion below.

```suggestion
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails MUST reflect eligibility based on the inherent nature of the Service, Category, and SKU (e.g., "Standard" vs "Spot"). 
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails SHOULD reflect inherent eligibility, but MAY include provider-specific constraints that affect purchase ability.
```

* Where possible, values in "EligibleCommitmentTypes" SHOULD correspond to values used in the [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) column for consistency.
* CommitmentEligibilityDetails root object MAY contain additional data generator-defined keys (e.g., vendor-specific eligibility constraints), provided they do not conflict with FOCUS-defined keys.

### Examples

The CommitmentEligibilityDetails object contains a list of commitment discount programs that are applicable to the line item's usage.

### Array Entries

Array contains one or more strings, representing the specific commitment programs:

| Value | ValueType | Required | Description |
| ----- | ---- | ---------- | ----------- |
| [CommitmentDiscountType](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscounttype) | [String](#attributes.stringhandling) | True | The specific type of commitment discount (e.g., "SavingsPlan", "ReservedInstance", "ResourceBasedCommittedUseDiscount") or vendor-specific pricing model (e.g., "MonthlyCommitment") available for this usage. |

### Example

```json
{
  "EligibleCommitmentTypes": [
    "SavingsPlan",

>     "ReservedInstance,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "ReservedInstance",
```
